I am starting a web development after school club at my local primary school (St Marks, Hadlow Down, East Sussex) on 3rd November 2011, with weekly 1 hour lessons after school on a Thursday (which apparently clashes with baton twirling club).  There are 10 pupils (if they all turn up) in years 5-6 (9-11 years old).  Classes are one hour (though that really turns out to be 50 minutes by the time they have settled down and got the computers booted).

I intend to keep this repo up to date with lesson plans, a record of how the lesson went, what I would have done differently etc.

I am not a teacher, and not even a good web developer, so feel free to comment / fork / make pull requests etc.

All the lessons are in the lessons folder, with observations about how they went in a sub-folder called reactions.

After the introductory lessons there is a project, to build a wish-list page.  This needs a "simple present list server":http://stmarkswebdev.herokuapp.com (this one has no security or privacy) or if you have some knowledge of node, git, heroku and mongodb you can deploy your own for free as follows:
* Clone this repo
* Create a mongo collection database (I used "MongoHQ":http://www.mongohq.com) and set up environment variables
* Create a heroku app and set up environment variables WDKS2_HOST, WDKS2_PORT, WDKS2_DBNAME, WDKS2_USERNAME, WDKS2_PASSWORD
* Make your changes if required (and submit pull requests, if appropriate)
* Push to heroku

Mark

Other useful resources relating to web development lessons I have discovered:
* "http://fingswotidun.com/javascript/":http://fingswotidun.com/javascript/ aimed at 9-11 year olds
* For slightly older groups of kids also covering web development at "blackheathcoding.posterous.com":http://blackheathcoding.posterous.com/ (who kindly allowed me to use their material about links for lesson 6).
* "Open University Javascript as first language course":http://www.open.ac.uk/computing/m150/courseoverview.html
* "John Resig blog post about teaching Javascript as a first language":http://ejohn.org/blog/javascript-as-a-first-language
* Some Mozilla material "here":http://labs.toolness.com/temp/hackasaurus-pdfs/hacktivity_kit.pdf

If you want to teach kids but not necessarily web development, a good starting point is Emma Mulqueeny's article "here":http://mulqueeny.wordpress.com/2011/08/20/how-to-initiate-kids-or-anyone-in-coding/